Frederick Field Snr, my Great-Grandfather
=========================================

-budgy pic

Although my grandfather died in the 1990s, I remember him quite well from my experiences with him as a boy and the things that my Mother and Grandmother have told me about him since. He was a tall man, born in Smallheath in Birmingham to a working class family, married for love to a devoted wife, father of two elder girls and a son, a committed trade-union organiser at the Longbridge Motor Plant, a keen gardener in his spare time and the keeper of an aviary of budgerigars. His biggest vice from what I can tell was smoking which probably eventually contributed to his death. The elder members of my family who were close to him as adults recall him as a moral, thoughtful and dilligent man; to my mother he was a key inspiration to her career as a teacher in inner city Birmingham and after her retirement his memory a spur to her volentary work with vulnerable and disadvantaged people.

In recent years I've been spending more time in Central Birmingham. Although it is a place I've been familiar with since I was a child, I've recently become interested in the soil from which my family, and therefore which I, grew from. Time is a very strange thing. I was recently talking to my Grandmother who is almost 90 years old. She told me that as a child when she learnt about things that happened two hundred years ago it felt terribly far in the past. Now she says that sense of distance has been shattered as she herself has been alive for almost half of that period of time. In terms of evolution both of the species and exchange of family traits 200 years is a heartbeat or a blink of the eye. However, in terms of the political and technological currents which still animate the world today, glimpses of the near past can seem to enrich and illuminate our understanding, or at least the subject gives this illusion to me.

Birmingham emerged as one of the first industrial centres, due to its proximity to raw materials smelted in the Black Country. When the technologies of the Industrial Revolution took hold its population exploded in a manner repeated since across the globe. Workers displaced by improved technology in the agarian economy of the countryside travelled to Birmingham and other industrial cities to find work, and in some cases to prevent starvation. Enterprenuers, capitalists and landowners co-operated to harness the twin influxes of cheap labour and rapidly more complex and efficient technology by building workshops, canals, railways, factories, banks and intermingled amongst it all rows of cheap densely packed housing. Birmingham was known as the workshop of the world during this time and produced metal goods in quantities unseen before, which were exported by the merchant navy to a planet about to move from a dormant and agarian state to the technologically enlivened modern world.

The censuses are extraordinarily detailed catalogues of the urban populace of this time. Kept at least in part as an inventory of the British Empire's potential might should she need to go to war, each man, woman and child is recorded along with their profession or trade, address, age and details as to any mental deficiency. Tracing this lineage back is somewhat tricky not least due to the very common names which my ancesters had. For example my Great-Grandmother Lily Jones was one of eleven Lily Joneses in the city at the time and one of three who were born in the same year. However, by correlating details in the living memory such as addresses and the names of siblings it is possible to find my both my Great-Grandparents in the census of 1911. From there I've traced back to 1901, 1891, 1881 and occasionally, and with great care, to the censuses of the mid-nineteenth century when the Industrial Revolution in Birmingham was at its peak.

One impression I could draw from the censuses is that Birmingham had a class of metalworkers and gunmakers who lived in densely packed rented accommodation, that women, especially girls participated in the work, involvement in the trade was regularly passed from generation to generation, marriages were frequently to members of the same class, and lots of children died before they reached school age. For example my Grandfather's Grandfather Thomas was born in 1861 and worked as a Nail Caster (these would be individually cast nails, before modern wire nails were developed). He lived on Vincent Street near Smallheath in 1891 with his wife in a back-to-back house and seems to have lost several young children between the 1881 and 1891 censuses. Thomas Pennell, my Grandmother's Great Grandfather was born in 1831 and worked as a Gun Maker (I assume these were of some use to the Empire). He lived in the St George district in 1861 with his wife in a back-to-back house and seems to have lost several children between the 1851 and 1861 censuses. Both of these Thomases would have descendants whom continued to live their lives in the area around Smallheath.

In the late 1940s after the disruption of the Second World War, two metalworking families intermarried. In the common manner of the time my Grandparents went to live with my Grandfather's parents Lily and Frederick Snr. Finding this out made me ask my Grandmother and others who remember them some details about my Grandfather's parents that they lived with right after they had married. I suppose my assumption was that my Grandfather's Dad was the template of his son, an idealistic and determined character, toiling against the forces of technological revolution, disease and perhaps even class discrimination. Against this assumption I found traces of the real character of my Great Grandfather Fred Snr, in my Grandmother's words 'a horrible man', albeit a dapper and intruiging one, who seemingly never had any money, could be a royal pain in the bum to all around him, and liked a drink a little too much. Assuming that my Grandfather's good traits are largely a function of his mother Lily, I've dug into the intruiging subject of my Great Grandfather Fred Snr, and been amazed at how much detail I've been able to find.

Fred Snr was born in 1891 to Thomas and Elisabeth Field, both in their 30s, who lived in Windsor Place, Vincent Street, in Balsall Heath, Birmingham. He had three elder siblings, Herbert, who was 7 when he was born, Thomas, who was 4 and Annie who was 3 years old. The census ten years later shows his sister Annie had died, the family had moved up the road, now living at 23 Studley Street with his parents, now in their 40s, his two older brothers and three younger siblings, Leonard, Winnefred and Beatrice. The case nail industry was by this time going into decline and Imperial Germany starting to appear to be a threat. By 1911 they had moved again to 2, back of 59 Oldfield Road, Balsall Heath. His father, now 50 years of age, still worked in the declining cast nail industry and he and his two surviving brothers, Herbert and Leonard were metalworkers also.




.. author:: default
.. categories:: none
.. tags:: none
.. comments::
